Not Doomed to Fail: An Examination of the Economic Factors in the Collapse of the Soviet 
Union 
On December 25, 1991 Mikhail Gorbachev resigned his position as leader of the USSR, 
the flag of the Soviet Union was taken down from the Kremlin, and the tricolor flag of the 
Russian Federation took its place. On that day, the decades-long Cold War finally ended. 1
Economic weaknesses rooted in bad investments, an extensive periphery, and barriers to trade 
and finance had resulted in a Soviet Union economically and technologically unable to compete 
with the burgeoning United States. Gorbachev’s program of reforms, intended to fix this, had 
instead weakened the central government, allowing growing political divides to lead to the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union. 
Francis Fukuyama called the end of the Soviet Union the “end of history,” positing that at 
last the world would see an end to large-scale conflict, an end to Marxism as an ideology of any 
significance, and an end even to art and philosophy as the human race became nothing but 
caretakers of a museum for the display of a now finished history. This both echoed and 2
contradicted Karl Marx who similarly believed in a teleological history, though with universal 
Communism as its natural endpoint. Of course, the intervening decades of global conflict, 3
revolutions, ideological struggles, and the continued influence of Marxism have proved Dr. 
Fukuyama wrong. This is not the end of history, merely the next chapter. However, his argument 
reflects a Cold War mentality that overestimates the importance of the ideological divide 
between the United States and the Soviet Union, portraying the conflict not as geopolitical, but 
 Conor O’Clery, Moscow, December 25, 1991: The Last Day of the Soviet Union (New York: Public Affairs, 2011), 1 1-8. Francis Fukuyama, “The End of History?” The National Interest 16 (Summer 1989): 3–18.2 Howard Williams, “The End of History in Hegel and Marx,” The European Legacy 2, no. 3 (May 1997): 557–66.3
Olson 2
as a moral struggle. This creates a false dichotomy where one side is righteous and the other 
depraved, ignoring the less fantastic reality that the two were merely rivals for global power, 
each willing to do either evil or good as it suited their interests. 
This paper will place the end of the Soviet Union back into its appropriate geopolitical 
and economic contexts. First it will give a brief overview of the “inherent flaws” theory of 
collapse. Then it will examine the role played by four broad external factors in creating the 
unfavorable economic conditions which existed when Gorbachev took office in 1985. The first 
of these four factors is the high cost of the Soviet periphery, followed by both implicit and 
explicit barriers to trade, then the issues with accessing foreign credit, and finally the economic 
costs of continued military and economic competition with the United States. Sprinkled 
throughout will be references to a fifth factor, the Soviet technological lag behind the United 
States which had become obvious by the 1980s. From there, this paper will argue that the 
program of reforms instituted by Gorbachev led directly to the political collapse and dissolution 
of the Soviet Union in 1991. Throughout, the argument focuses not on a moral or predestined 
failing, but rather on specific circumstances and economic shortcomings not dependent on the 
Soviet system for their existence. 
Rejection of the “Inherent Flaws” Theory of Collapse 
Having “won” the Cold War, the West felt vindicated, its ideology confirmed as superior, 
and academia was not immune to this thinking. Many authors, blinded by their biases, blamed 
the collapse on some flaw inherent in the Soviet Union, socialism, or command economies in 
general. This interpretation was most prevalent in the immediate aftermath of the Soviet collapse 
but has never completely disappeared, especially in the public consciousness which is why this 
Olson 3
opinion can be seen in political ads, Facebook posts, and Twitter tirades on a daily basis. Within 
academia however, the chief early proponents of this theory were British economist Alec Nove 
and American economist Paul Craig Roberts. 
Alexander “Alec” Nove was one of the West’s leading scholars on Soviet studies. He was 
also an early advocate for the argument of inherent weaknesses in the Soviet system. Even before 
the collapse, in his book, The Soviet Economic System, Nove argued that central planning, while 
capable of responding to macroeconomic issues like the oil crisis, was unable to adequately 
address microeconomic issues including incentivizing labor or increasing plant efficiency. 4
Looking specifically at the workings of the retail market, Nove argued that the lack of any profit 
motive to provide quality products or service coupled with a strong motive to show high 
productivity, whether it truly existed or not, led to a weak and inefficient consumer economy 
with substandard products. Nonetheless, in 1986, as the USSR continued to stand regardless of 5
any flaws it may have had, Nove was still forced to admit, “despite everything, the Soviet econ
omy does function.”  6
Six years later, in 1992, the Soviet Union had collapsed, and Nove’s tone changed. In An 
Economic History of the USSR, Nove was more decisive in his condemnation of the Soviet 
system. Now that the system had collapsed, Nove claimed that collapse had always been 
inevitable. Nove argued that the only way the Soviet Union might have prevented its collapse 
was a wholesale conversion from a command economy to a market economy. Such a change, he 
argued, was not only incompatible with Soviet ideology but also deeply unpopular with the 
 Alec Nove, The Soviet Economic System, Third Edition (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1986), 395-397.4 Nove, Soviet Economic System, 266-270.5 Ibid, xv.6
Olson 4
public who had grown accustomed to low prices for necessities, rent controls, and job security. 
They were deeply distrustful of the uncertainty a free market would bring. Eventually, though, 7
economic pressures forced the change, and the USSR dissolved. As Nove puts it, “The command 
economy required a command polity. They rose together, they have fallen together.” For Nove, 8
without the command economy to justify its existence, the central authority served no further 
purpose. 
Even more so than Nove, Paul Craig Roberts saw socialism as an utterly flawed system. 
In his 1990 book, Alienation and the Soviet Economy, Roberts stated that the goal of Marxism 
was to create a system of production where products move directly from producers to consumers, 
without any commodities used as vehicles of exchange or value storage. Roberts then claimed 9
the Soviet Union was unable to achieve anything more than a facsimile of this non-commodity 
mode of production which Marxism had as its goal, obscuring the failure with bureaucratic 
machinations. As Roberts argued, the Soviet Union did not succeed in creating a new system, but 
merely an “abstract and irrational form” of the old system, with the smooth workings of 
capitalism complicated by the obfuscations of the Soviet state rather than replaced by the system 
of equal distribution the revolution promised. 10
Another of Roberts’ books, Meltdown, written with Karen LaFollette and also published 
in 1990, again extolled the evils of centrally planned economies. As evidence, the authors opened 
their work with Gorbachev’s 1988 revelation that except in a handful of areas, the Soviet 
 Alec Nove, An Economic History of the USSR, 1917-1991, Third Edition (London: Penguin Books, 1992), 397.7 Ibid, 428-429.8 Paul Craig Roberts, Alienation and the Soviet Economy: The Collapse of the Socialist Era, Second Edition (New 9 York: Holmes & Meier Publishers, 1990), 46-47. Ibid, xxv-xxvi.10
Olson 5
economy had not grown in twenty years. They quickly followed this with the assertion that 11
even “Third World countries” like Brazil and Malaysia have higher standards of living than the 
USSR. Roberts and LaFollette described Soviet socialism as a system which had “stripped 12
Soviet citizens of moral and ethical codes by which to live … indoctrinated people against 
individual achievement and initiative and has bred passivity and mediocrity.” For these authors, 13
the socialist system was inherently broken and irredeemably evil. 
In a 1991 article, Abram Bergson observed that the USSR had lower per capita 
consumption than any but the poorest of the OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development) states, Turkey. In an argument closer to that of Nove than Roberts, Bergson 
blamed this low consumption on low productivity caused by ideological and political constraints 
placed on individual agency and incentive in the Soviet command economy. He argued that the 
Soviet system, which distributed wealth based on bureaucratic decisions rather than as reward for 
individual achievement, as he claimed capitalism did, failed to create an incentive for workers to 
put any more than the minimum effort into their work. Bergson identified this as the inherent 
flaw in the Soviet system which was the ultimate cause for the USSR’s economic woes in the 
1980s. However this assumes that the Soviet economy shared the Western goal of maximizing 14
consumption. As Mancur Olson pointed out, such an attempt to measure the Soviet economy 
based on Western models is pointless since the two are fundamentally different in their goals and 
structures. 15
 Paul Craig Roberts and Karen LaFollette, Meltdown: Inside the Soviet Economy (Washington D.C.: Cato Institute, 11 1990), 1. Ibid, 5.12 Ibid, 95-96.13 Abram Bergson, “The USSR Before the Fall: How Poor and Why,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, no. 4 14 (Fall 1991): 29–44. Mancur Olson, “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development,” The American Political Science Review 87, no. 3 15 (September 1993): 567–76.
Olson 6
As if to directly challenge these writers and their post hoc talk of the collapse’s 
inevitability, Vladimir Kontorovich questioned why no one had been able to see it coming? 
Rather than laying the blame on bad scholarship, he posited that the collapse was inherently 
unforeseeable. The West lacked access to the sort of information needed to accurately predict the 
Soviet economy, and those actors, like the CIA, who did have more access to information, 
making their predictions more accurate, also had more reason to lie about the strength of the 
Soviet economy. The questionable motivations of government organizations, like the political 
desire to portray their rival as weak in order to bolster faith in the ruling system, made their more 
dire predictions less believable. While the lack of reliable data on the Soviet economy was 16
certainly not a uniquely Western phenomenon, if the Soviet economy was innately doomed as 
Roberts and Nove argued it was then it is baffling how Western scholars failed to predict the 
collapse. This suggests that the flaws were perhaps not as serious as they claimed. 
More directly detracting from Nove’s work is the fact that An Economic History of the 
USSR focused almost entirely on research and figures from the Soviet regime itself, which Nove 
distrusted and therefore refused to rely on. By rejecting Soviet figures and ignoring Western 
sources, his work is left without any statistical data to back it up. Thus, as Gregory Grossman 
said in his review, “Nove tells the story of Soviet economic development … but fails to show 
statistically what it has amounted to.” This lack of reliance on hard figures makes the work 17
little more than economic philosophy with arguments based more in ideology than in facts. 
Somehow, despite six decades of war, famine, and constant competition with the West, 
 Vladimir Kontorovich, “Economists, Soviet Growth Slowdown and the Collapse,” Europe-Asia Studies 53, no. 5 16 (2001): 675–95. Gregory Grossman, “Review of An Economic History of the USSR by Alec Nove,” The Russian Review 29, no. 3 17 (July 1970): 338–39.
Olson 7
not only did the Soviet Union survive, but the standard of living measurably improved under 
Soviet rule. As the following table illustrates, GDP per capita grew by over five-hundred 18
percent from 1929 to 1989, suggesting the average Soviet citizen was significantly better off on 
the eve of the collapse than the average Soviet citizen had been just after the revolution. This 19
growth rate was unmatched by the United States, which increased GDP per capita by less than 
three-hundred and fifty percent over the same period, or the United Kingdom, which grew by 
less than three-hundred percent. 20
Overall GDP growth in the USSR was also globally competitive until at least the late 
1970s. Even then, the Soviet system remained stable, if inefficient. The leadership was generally 
satisfied with the state of the economy and there was no widespread popular opposition to the 
command economy. So Mikhail Gorbachev’s decision to pursue economic reforms was not 
driven by fear of collapse, but by fear of losing its ability to compete internationally. As the 
Table 1: USSR GDP/Capita measured in 1990 International Dollars GDP/Capita Change 1929 1,386 N/A 1939 2,237 +851 1949 2,623 +386 1959 3,669 +1,046 1969 5,225 +1,556 1979 6,472 +1,247 1989 7,098 +1,873
 Philip Hanson, The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Economy: An Economic History of the USSR from 1945 (New 18 York: Routledge, 2003), 240. Angus Maddison, The World Economy, Development Centre Studies (Paris, France: Development Centre of the 19 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2006), 478-479. Maddison, World Economy, 460-461, 441-442.20
Olson 8
United States maintained its position on top of the global economy and growth rates in Japan and 
China accelerated, the Soviet Union risked being left behind if it did nothing. However, it was 21
the reforms, not the system itself that led to collapse. Whatever flaws the Soviet system had, they 
were not the direct cause of its downfall. 
Further discrediting the idea that the Soviet Union collapsed due to inherent economic 
flaws is the fact that another command economy, China, not only survived but thrived after 
successfully opening itself to the West. Unlike the Soviet Union, China did not back down from 
its commitment to authoritarianism in order to appease Western investors. Instead, after 
Tiananmen Square, the Chinese government under Deng Xiaoping doubled down. While 
Gorbachev faced mounting opposition, both from the periphery and in Moscow itself, Deng 
oversaw an expansion of China’s central authority. Then, while the Soviet Union’s economy 
collapsed, the Chinese economy quickly grew to rival even that of the United States. Granted, 22
there are significant differences between the two economies but, like the Soviet Union, the 
Chinese government has maintained control over its economy even while opening up to Western 
business. China may have embraced capitalism, but it certainly has not abandoned the command 
economy, and it has grown under that model. This is not to say that the Chinese model would 23
necessarily have worked for the Soviet Union, only that a free economy is not a prerequisite to 
success. 
The idea that the Soviet Union was somehow doomed to fall due to its nature as a 
 Paul R Gregory, The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives (Cambridge: 21 Cambridge University Press, 2004), 243-246. Chris Miller, The Struggle to Save the Soviet Economy: Mikhail Gorbachev and the Collapse of the USSR (Chapel 22 Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2016), 3-7,  Abby Johnston and Catherine Trautwein, “What Is the China Model? Understanding the Country’s State-Led 23 Economic Model,” Frontline, May 17, 2019.
Olson 9
command economy is perhaps a comforting thought for Western ideologues. If the alternative to 
free market capitalism is a system so full of inherent flaws that it cannot hope to last, then those 
who support the free market can feel confident they are backing the winning team. Similarly, the 
argument provides ammunition to those who seek the continuance of unfettered capitalism for 
less scrupulous reasons. Both of these motivations are prevalent in the Western world and create 
biases that may blind scholars, journalists, and others. The inherent flaws theory is comfortable 
and easy to accept. It puts the blame for the collapse on the Soviet system itself, freeing the 
Western world from the uncomfortable task of self-examination to see if our system perhaps 
possesses some of the same weaknesses as the Soviet Union did. However, just because 
something is easy to accept does not mean it is correct. In fact, such an easy answer could well 
be dangerous if it blinds present actors to their own shortcomings. 
Of course, the argument could be made that none of this demonstrates actual proof 
against the inherent flaws theory. Gorbachev’s reforms could still be called a reaction to flaws in 
the system. China very well could have succeeded in spite of its command structure rather than 
because of it. This is why the most compelling argument against the inherent flaws theory is the 
existence of many better and more robust explanations such as the high cost of competition with 
the United States and its allies, the Soviet periphery’s drain on resources, unfavorable trade 
conditions, and lack of access to foreign credit. These are what we will examine now, starting 
with the Soviet periphery. 
The Cost of Empire 
The World-Systems Theory, developed by Immanuel Wallerstein in the 1970s, broke the 
global capitalist economy into three sections, the core, the periphery, and the semi-periphery 
Olson 10
which exists as a middle point between the two. The theory argued wealth tended to flow out of 
the periphery and into the core or, more accurately, that the wealth generated within the system 
was shared unequally, with the majority going to the core states. The core extracts surplus value 24
from its periphery by monopolizing the most profitable industries and leaving the periphery to 
pursue more competitive, lower profit endeavors. The exact nature of these industries changes 
over time, as textiles was a highly profitable core industry in the nineteenth century and a low
profit peripheral industry by the end of the twentieth, but the principle remains. This model 25
does a good job describing how capitalist economies benefit from their periphery, but the Soviet 
Union was not a capitalist economy. 
Unlike the United States, which could draw in resources and wealth from its periphery, 
the Soviet Union had a periphery that acted more as a drain on resources. Both near and far, the 
states under Moscow’s influence, the so-called Second World, tended to cost far more than they 
contributed. Aid and weapons sent to Cuba, Africa, Latin America, and elsewhere were seldom 
repaid in anything other than promises. Even within the USSR, most republics outside of Russia 
operated at net losses, offsetting their economic shortcomings with resources redistributed from 
or by Russia. While the Soviet periphery may have benefited from the USSR, the USSR 
certainly did not benefit economically from its periphery. 
If there was no profit in aiding the Second World, then that raises the question of why 
Moscow would keep devoting resources to such an unprofitable endeavor. The answer is simple 
and twofold. First, the Cold War was a global conflict and the Soviet Union felt it needed to 
confront its rival, the United States, on every possible front in order to emerge victorious. 
 Immanuel Wallerstein, The Capitalist World Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 292-293.24 Immanuel Wallerstein, World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction (Durham: Duke University Press, 2004), 28-29.25
Olson 11
Second, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union saw itself as the vanguard of a global 
revolution, a title which came with an ideological responsibility to aid and support anti-capitalist 
uprisings worldwide. The USSR, politically and ideologically, did not have the choice to refuse 
aid to their fellow socialists. Communism was a global movement long before the  advent of 
globalism. An individual nation’s interests could not be allowed to hinder the progress of 26
workers everywhere. As Joseph Stalin said in February 1931 when announcing the first Five Year 
Plan, “It is the jungle law of capitalism. You are backward, you are weak-therefore you are 
wrong; hence, you can be beaten and enslaved … That is why we must no longer lag behind … 
That is what our obligations to the workers and peasants of the U.S.S.R. dictate to us. But we 
have yet other, more serious and more important, obligations. They are our obligations to the 
world proletariat.” So the Soviet Union supported numerous states, regimes, and uprisings, all 27
with varying degrees of success, and most at a net loss. 
The Soviet interventions in Africa were particularly expensive. As the traditional 
“playground” of Europe, Africa was one of the most heavily colonized regions on earth in the 
twentieth century. As both local and international pressures rose for decolonization, the Soviet 
Union had clear ideological motivations to become involved. As Lenin himself said, 
“imperialism … is that highest stage of capitalism at which [the separation of money capital 
from production capital] reaches vast proportions.” Despite this, the Soviet Union firmly 28
resisted any attempts by the international community to set aid goals, arguing that the fault of 
 A. James McAdams, Vanguard of the Revolution: The Global Idea of the Communist Party (Princeton, New 26 Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2017), 3. Joseph Stalin, “Speech Delivered at the First All-Union Conference of Leading Personnel of Socialist 27 Industry,” (February 4, 1931). Vladimir Illyich Lenin, Imperialism, The Highest Stage of Capitalism (Petrograd, 1916).28
Olson 12
colonization lay solely with the Western world. Regardless, the Soviet Union had seemingly 29
little issue with the sending of military aid. Between 1974 and 1978, the Soviet Union sent nearly 
$6 billion worth of weapons to Africa, often at either extreme discount or no cost to the 
recipients. For example, in 1980, the Soviet Union sold 15 MiG-21 fighters to the Ratsiraka 
regime in Madagascar. Of these, three were sold at full price, nine were discounted by fifty 
percent, and the last three were given to the regime for free. While the MiG-21 may not have 30
been the priciest of fighter jets, that sort of arms dealing is not a sustainable business model and 
Madagascar was not the only country receiving handouts. Numerous other states, especially 
Angola, received significant military aid from the Soviet Union during the 1980s. 31
Cuba was a somewhat unique case, but not because of any economic benefit. The island 
was heavily reliant on Soviet aid for its survival. By 1990, almost three quarters of Cuban 
imports and nearly all of Cuban petroleum imports came from the USSR, all sold at a discount. 
In return, Cuba exported sugar, citrus, tobacco, and nickel, all at markup prices. Estimates put the 
total amount of Soviet subsidies to Cuba between $3.5 and $4.5 billion annually, making Cuba 
the largest single recipient of Soviet aid by the late 1980s. What made Cuba so uniquely valuable 
was its geography. Located just ninety miles off the US coast, Cuba was a crucial strategic ally 
for the Soviet Union, giving the USSR the ability to threaten Washington directly in the same 
way the US could threaten Moscow from Turkey. The immense economic cost may well have 32
been worth it to Moscow in strategic terms, but it was certainly a burden that the Soviet economy 
 Colin W. Lawson, “Soviet Economic Aid to Africa,” African Affairs 87, no. 349 (October 1988): 501–18.29 Richard E. Bissell, “Soviet Military Aid to Africa,” Journal of Contemporary African Studies 1, no. 1 (October 30 1981): 1–18; Michael Mcfaul, “The Demise of the World Revolutionary Process: Soviet-Angolan Relations Under 31 Gorbachev,” Journal of Southern African Studies 16, no. 1 (March 1990): 165–89. Susan Kaufman Purcell, “Collapsing Cuba,” Foreign Affairs 71, no. 1, America and the World (1991/1992): 130–32 45.
Olson 13
could not bear indefinitely. 
Similarly, Soviet influence in Latin America promised important strategic benefits, 
though none as great as Cuba, but little in the way of economic advantage. The close proximity 
to the US made Latin American allies both strategically and politically valuable. However, the 
region lacked the economic power to provide the valuable trading partners the Soviet Union 
needed. Argentina stands out in this regard because it did actually offer some economic benefits 
in the early 1980s when it supplied wheat during the US embargo, but even at its height, 
Argentina profited far more than the USSR. By the late 1980s, the Soviet need for Argentine 
wheat had passed and the Soviet Union attempted to renegotiate better trade terms, in line with 
the new policy to promote balanced trade between the USSR and its allies. However, Argentina 
refused, citing a need for hard currency brought in by the imbalanced trade and leaving the 
economic burden for the Soviet Union to bear alone. 33
No single foreign endeavor cost the Soviet Union more than the war in Afghanistan. With 
a $50 billion price-tag, some fifteen thousand Soviet dead, and five million Afghani refugees, the 
invasion of Afghanistan was an undeniably costly and foolish endeavor. As the United States 34
learned almost two decades later, Afghanistan is nearly impossible to control and any attempt to 
subdue the state by force is almost certainly doomed to fail. This small, poor, unindustrialized 
country has somehow proven to be the bane of two superpowers. 
However the Soviet war in Afghanistan cost more than just money and lives. Its deepest 
costs came in the damage it did to the reputations of the Soviet Union and the Soviet Army. Prior 
 Fernando Bustamante, “Soviet Foreign Policy toward Latin America: Time for Renewal,” Journal of 33 Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 32, no. 4 (Winter 1990): 35–65. Charles Dunbar, “Afghanistan in 1987: A Year of Decision?,” Asian Survey 28, no. 2, A Survey of Asia in 1987: 34 Part II (February 1988): 148–62.
Olson 14
to the Afghan War, the Soviet Union frequently deployed its military on its own soil as a tool for 
maintaining stability and suppressing dissent. Despite this, the legacy of World War II kept the 
Army in favor, drawing soldiers from every race and nationality within the union. More than any 
other institution, it represented for the Soviet people the realization of the Communist ideal of 
global unity. Most importantly though, the Soviet Army was seen as invincible. The defeat in 
Afghanistan changed that. Now, instead of a bright beacon of hope and strength, the Army 
represented defeat in a war the average citizen increasingly viewed as unjust, a view that the 
newly freed media had no issue disseminating. As the 1980s came to a close, the thin veneer of 35
civilization was cracking in the USSR and the military the Soviet government had used to glue it 
back together in the past was losing its efficacy. 
Faced with mounting pressure at home as the war neared its tenth year and continued 
pressure abroad as the growing Afghani refugee community pulled at heartstrings around the 
world, Gorbachev chose to withdraw from Afghanistan. In February 1988, he announced that the 
Soviet Union would begin withdrawing troops on May 15 of the same year with the goal being to 
withdraw all troops within ten months. However, by that point it was already the longest and 36
one of the costliest wars in Soviet history. Even if not directly responsible for the end of the 
Soviet Union it was, as Charles Tilly said, the “closest equivalent” to the wars that had preceded 
the collapse of other European empires in the modern age. Though there may not have been 37
Afghani soldiers marching through Moscow tearing down flags like the Red Army had done in 
Berlin, the cost of the war should not be underestimated. 
 Rafael Reuveny and Aseem Prakash, “The Afghanistan War and the Breakdown of the Soviet Union,” Review of 35 International Studies 25, no. 4 (October 1999): 693–708. Mikhail Gorbachev, “Text of Gorbachev Statement Setting Forth Soviet Position on Afghan War,” The New York 36 Times, February 9, 1988, sec. A, New York Times Archive. Charles Tilly, European Revolutions, 1491-1992 (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1993), 231.37
Olson 15
By the time Gorbachev took power in 1985, it had become clear to Soviet leadership that 
continued Soviet expansion in the Third World was not economically feasible. The Soviet 
aligned states were among the poorest in the world and the USSR could no longer afford to 
provide the aid they required. Retrenchment was economically necessary even though politically 
unpopular. Despite conservative objections, economic necessity led Gorbachev to reduce Soviet 
expenditures abroad throughout his time in office. 38
Closer to home, Eastern Europe was also proving to be a drain on Soviet resources. The 
Soviet Bloc initially possessed many of the characteristics of a successful and profitable empire, 
appearing to be both politically and economically isolated from outside influence, highly 
compliant, and having mutually beneficial relationships between local and “imperial” elites. 
Despite this, Eastern Europe was, by the 1980s, no longer a net benefit to the Soviet Union. 39
The lack of a market price system led to disparities between intra-bloc trade value and world 
market value. In general, manufactured goods, which the Soviet Union tended to import from 
Eastern Europe, were overpriced while fuels and raw materials, which tended to flow from the 
Soviet Union to Eastern Europe, were underpriced. This created a de facto subsidy of Eastern 
Europe by the Soviet Union. 40
This had not always been the case. In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, 
Eastern Europe was as close to an ideal empire as the Soviet Union could have asked for. As 
conquerors pushing a radical new form of government, they were able to quickly establish stable 
local authorities and rapidly rebuild economies devastated by war. In return, these client states 
 Margot Light, “Soviet Policy in the Third World,” International Affairs 67, no. 2 (April 1991): 263–80.38 Valerie Bunce, “The Empire Strikes Back: The Evolution of the Eastern Bloc from a Soviet Asset to a Soviet 39 Liability,” International Organization 39, no. 1 (1985): 1–46. Josef C Brada, “Interpreting the Soviet Subsidization of Eastern Europe,” International Organization 42, no. 4 40 (Autumn 1988): 639–58.
Olson 16
contributed capital to the Soviet Union in amounts roughly equal to the amount transferred from 
the United States to Western Europe under the Marshall Plan. That is not to say that Eastern 
Europe did not also benefit in this arrangement, it did, but this state of mutual benefit did not 
last. 41
As early as the mid-1960s the Soviet “empire” in Europe was costing far more than it was 
contributing, at least economically. Though it still contributed greatly to Soviet security, the 
rising power of local elites in the lesser republics led to less cooperation with Moscow and 
decreased intra-bloc trade as the interests of local elites diverged from those of the central 
government. At this point it is worth questioning whether the Soviet Union could even be truly 42
called an empire. Even under Stalin, the republics had been nominally sovereign. After 1944, all 
the Soviet republics had their own ministries of foreign affairs, and though they may have been 
political tools for the Soviet Union, Belorussia and Ukraine had their own seats at the United 
Nations. If the client states were not truly politically isolated and no longer even economically 43
beneficial, then it is not accurate to call the Soviet Union, at least by the end, an empire. It was a 
union of states, perhaps not an altogether voluntary union, but a union nonetheless. 
Exacerbating the inter-republic political conflicts, although it possessed the infrastructure 
for development, Eastern Europe lacked the surplus population of Central Asia and the abundant 
natural resources of Siberia. Similarly, Siberia lacked both the population and infrastructure to 
develop while Central Asia lacked the infrastructure and resources. These three subregions were 
divided from each other in such a way that they operated almost as independent economies. The 
 Bunce, “The Empire Strikes Back”41 Ibid.42 Jerry F. Hough, “Perilous Ties?: Economic Reform and Russian ‘Imperialism,’” The Brookings Review 12, no. 3 43 (Summer 1994): 4–9.
Olson 17
vast distances and lack of both transportation and distribution infrastructure in the USSR kept the 
Soviet Union from overcoming these regional divides. This was not a new problem, as the vast 44
size of Russia had repeatedly caused issues in the past with accessing the vast resource stores 
within its borders, leading to the problematic benefit of Russia often having its strength 
overestimated. However, despite centuries of facing the same problem, the Soviet Union had 45
failed to find an adequate solution. 
Combined with, and perhaps because of, these problems, the Soviet system never 
achieved the same level of stability in Eastern Europe that it had in Russia itself. The system in 
Eastern Europe was built on coercion and subsidy. The local elites lacked the sort of political 
capital necessary to ride out economic stress, making it difficult to reform the system as any 
reform would involve a measure of at least temporary discomfort. As Alec Nove argued, central 46
planning, while capable of quickly responding to macroeconomic issues like the oil crisis, was 
unable to adequately address microeconomic issues like incentivizing labor or increasing 
manufacturing plant efficiency. Those who bought into the system wholeheartedly could be 47
incentivized through non-economic means, but Eastern Europe as a whole lacked that 
commitment. 
The economic downturn in 1990 proved to be the final nail in the coffin for Soviet 
socialism in Eastern Europe, with popular opinion turning decisively against a system now seen 
as broken. Though many have pointed to rising nationalism, liberalization, or a desire for 
 Keith A. Dunn, “Strategy, the Soviet Union and the 1980s,” Naval War College Review 34, no. 5 (October 1981): 44 15–31. Valerie Bunce, “Domestic Reform and International Change: The Gorbachev Reforms in Historical Perspective,” 45 International Organization 47, no. 1 (Winter 1993): 107–38. Valerie Bunce, “Eastern Europe: Is the Party Over?,” PS: Political Science and Politics 22, no. 2 (June 1989): 46 233–41. Nove, Soviet Economic System, 397.47
Olson 18
democracy as the driving force behind the overthrow of Soviet regimes in the early 1990s, the 
economic downturn was the real catalyst for the collapse. Let us take the fall of the Soviet 
regime in Tajikistan as an example. Isaac Scarborough’s 2016 article pointed to the sharp 
economic downturn in 1990 as the immediate cause, shifting the blame for perestroika-era 
troubles among the general public away from overt political factors and toward economic issues. 
In particular, Scarborough pointed to rising unemployment, declining production, disastrous 
policies such as price reforms, and inter-republic trade disputes, all leading to a declining quality 
of life, as the primary cause for the unrest and the eventual collapse of the Tajik government in 
August 1991. 48
Trade Barriers 
In addition to the issues within the Soviet sphere of influence, the Soviet Union also 
faced significant economic difficulties when interacting with states from outside its orbit. 
Although the USSR faced few formal barriers to trade, numerous factors created informal 
barriers, limiting the Soviet Union’s ability to act in the global market. Without free access to 
trade, a state has difficulty growing its economy as it must rely on domestic sources. These 
domestic sources may prove less efficient or more costly than the same goods purchased abroad, 
limiting the state’s ability to maximize productivity. Similarly, without access to global markets, 
domestic producers may be forced to sell goods at a lower price than they would get abroad, 
limiting the state’s ability to accumulate the capital necessary for growth. 
One of the few formal barriers that did exist came from the Soviet Union’s own 
protectionist policies, which went far beyond the regulations or tariffs levied by even the most 
 Isaac Scarborough, “(Over)Determining Social Disorder: Tajikistan and the Economic Collapse of Perestroika,” 48 Central Asian Survey 35, no. 3 (2016): 439–63.
Olson 19
protectionist of free economies. The Soviet system did not allow for any private element in 
foreign trade. All trade was negotiated directly by the Soviet government, a system that served to 
insulate Soviet industry from competition with more advanced Western economies but also 
created an economy unable to compete in global markets. Gorbachev’s reforms may have aimed 
to rectify this shortcoming, but any attempt to end protectionism was at odds with the core 
ideological tenets of the Soviet Union. 49
Instead of reworking trade policies to address shortcomings, the Soviet Union withdrew 
into itself. Past attempts by Eastern Europe to open up to the West had been disastrous, as when 
Poland became overly reliant on Western finance only to find it no longer available as food 
prices continued to deviate from their market value. This led to a near total collapse of the 50
Polish economy and a declaration of martial law, with the Soviet Union lucky not to have to send 
in the Soviet Army to maintain peace. After such experiences, the Soviet Union incorrectly 
concluded that the optimal strategy for dealing with inconsistencies between the internal Soviet 
economy and the global economy was to limit contact between the two, refocusing all Soviet 
trade inwards, toward Russia. 51
By 1990, virtually all trade between the USSR and the outside world went through 
Russia, further cementing the control of the central government. As the following table shows, 
the second largest Soviet import-exporter, Ukraine, was still a very distant second behind Russia, 
conducting only about a sixth as much international trade as Russia did in 1990. Meanwhile, 
Russia in 1990 was single-handedly responsible for more than seventy percent of all trade in and 
 Jerry F. Hough, “Gorbachev’s Strategy,” Foreign Affairs 64, no. 1 (Fall 1985): 33–55.49 Ian Shapiro, “Fiscal Crisis of the Polish State: Genesis of the 1980 Strikes,” Theory and Society 10, no. 4 (July 50 1981): 469–502. Jerry F. Hough, “Attack on Protectionism in the Soviet Union? A Comment,” International Organization 40, no. 2 51 (1986): 489–503.
Olson 20
out of the Soviet bloc. This sort of centralized trade allowed Moscow high levels of control 52
over trade with the outside world, but without trade, the other republics were less able to advance 
their own economies or develop independent supply streams for capital and consumer goods. 
In the long run, rather than protecting Soviet industries from competition, these policies 
only served to make them less competitive. In addition to the absence of competition leading to a 
lack of motivation to improve efficiency or productivity, the isolation from the global exchange 
of goods and ideas left the Soviet Union technologically behind the rest of the world. This 53
technological gap became evident as the United States became the world leader in the field of 
computers while the Soviet Union was left behind, forced to accept the import of foreign 
equipment to have any hope of catching up. 54
This widening gap in technology between the East and West left the USSR unable to 
compete in the global market. The Soviet Union did not just lag behind in the field of computers, 
but in almost every sector of industry and technology. After World War II the United States’ 
Table 2: 1990 World Trade in Millions of 1990 US Dollars Exports Imports %Total Russia 80,900 82,900 72.56% Ukraine 13,390 15,907 12.98% Belarus 3,438 5,256 3.85% Kazakhstan 1,777 3,250 2.23% Uzbekistan 1,390 2,217 1.60% All Others 3,826 11,496 6.79%
 Misha V. Belkindas and Olga V. Ivanova, eds., Foreign Trade Statistics in the USSR and Successor States 52 (Washington D.C.: The World Bank, 1995), 61. Jerry F. Hough, Opening Up the Soviet Economy (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1988), 77.53 Seymour E. Goodman, “Soviet Computing and Technology Transfer: An Overview,” World Politics 31, no. 4 (July 54 1979): 539–70.
Olson 21
“collective capacity to create, develop, and deploy new technology,” or its national technology 
enterprise, exploded. The postwar period, at least until the mid-1990s saw the US nearly 
unchallenged in its economic and technological preeminence. As US allies and trade partners, 55
Western Europe, Japan, South Korea, and the rest of the First World benefited from American 
advances. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union’s protectionist policies cut it out of the trade that 
propagated the new technological advances. This became a self-perpetuating cycle as the 
inability to trade left the Soviet Union with less capacity to improve its technology and therefore 
its ability to trade. 56
Further hampering the development of civilian technology in the Soviet Union was the 
preeminence of military spending in the budget. Thanks to central planning, the health of the 
Soviet economy had always been reliant on budgetary decisions. Early growth rates were driven 
by government investments in heavy industry. With the exception of the 1940s, which saw 
terrible growth thanks to the devastation of the Second World War, those investments helped the 
Soviet economy expand rapidly from the 1930s through the 1960s. Though it did not match 
Japan, the USSR was the second most successful economy in the world during the period as 
measured by percent change in GDP per capita. As the following table shows, of the forty-nine 
countries whose GDP per capita Angus Maddison calculated for both 1928 and 1970, the USSR 
saw the second largest percent increase. Meanwhile, the United States saw a much smaller 
percent change, but due to its far higher starting point it remained well ahead of the Soviet Union 
in absolute terms. 57
 National Academy of Engineering, Mastering a New Role: Shaping Technology Policy for National Economic 55 Performance (Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 1993), 7-22. Nikolai Shmelev and Vladimir Popov, Turning Point: Revitalizing the Soviet Economy, trans. Michele A. Berdy 56 (New York: Doubleday, 1989), 220-246. Maddison, The World Economy, 229-333.57
Olson 22
This continued economic disparity meant that, despite stellar growth, as the arms race 
accelerated in the 1970s, in order to keep up with US expansions, the military started taking up 
an increasingly larger portion of the Soviet budget, drawing resources away from civilian R&D 
projects. While the rate of invention is difficult to measure, most indicators suggest the budget 
change coincided with a drop in civilian innovation. By the 1980s, most of the Soviet 58
leadership agreed the “guns over butter” spending had to end for the Soviet Union’s economy to 
start growing again. 59
As the world entered the 1980s, the United States dominated the high-tech sectors while 
the Third World, with its cheap labor, dominated the low-tech manufacturing sectors, leaving the 
Soviet Union to rely on natural resources for export, primarily oil, a non-renewable energy 
source that would eventually run out. Natural resources, especially oil, are not a reliable basis 60
for economic growth. States like Norway may have successfully turned oil wealth into economic 
growth, but most states run afoul of the resource curse. Abundant natural resources create wealth, 
Table 3: GDP Per Capita in 1990 US Dollars 1928 1970 %Change 1) Japan 1,992 9,714 487.56% 2) USSR 1,370 5,575 406.96% 3) Bulgaria 1,219 4,773 391.55% 4) Portugal 1,470 5,473 372.23% 5) Finland 2,707 9,577 353.75% 6) Venezuela 3,057 10,672 349.07% 25) United States 6,569 15,030 228.79%
 Robert C. Allen, “The Rise and Decline of the Soviet Economy,” Canadian Journal of Economics 34, no. 4 58 (November 2001): 859–81. William E. Odom, The Collapse of the Soviet Military (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998), 392-393.59 Shmelev and Popoy, Turning Point, 223-224.60
Olson 23
but often only for the elite or foreign investors, fueling inequality instead of development. 
Failing that, the over-reliance on a single industry leaves a country vulnerable to massive 
economic consequences to even small price changes. However, without the technology to 61
compete in the manufacturing and information sectors, the Soviet Union had no other choice but 
to rely on oil sales. 
Access to Credit 
Making the situation worse, by the 1980s, the Soviet Union lacked access to sufficient 
lines of credit to change the direction of its economy. Without foreign investment, the Soviet 
Union could not buy Western technology, construct modern factories, or develop a competitive 
computer industry. The USSR needed foreign credit in order to build a competitive economy, but 
there were significant barriers, both formal and informal, to procuring those funds. 
Global financial institutions and markets functioned on very different principles than the 
internal finances of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union kept its books secret and treated ledgers 
as little more than suggestions. Western finance required regular bookkeeping, transparency, 
audits, and accountability. Though the Soviet Union had borrowed heavily in the past, by the late 
1980s, Western lenders wanted more transparency before investing further in the Soviet 
economy. In the interest of giving the West a “stable and predictable partner” to work with, the 
Politburo recommended the Soviet Union seek membership in both the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank. As the end approached, Soviet leadership saw this concession as 
necessary to the political and economic futures of the USSR. 62
 Michael L. Ross, “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse,” World Politics 51, no. 2 (January 1999): 297–61 322. Politburo CC CPSU, “On Relations between the USSR and the International Monetary Fund and the World 62 Bank,” August 29, 1989.
Olson 24
Further undermining the USSR’s credit-worthiness was its inability to repay the large 
debts taken on in the 1970s and earlier. As late as 1972, the Soviet Union still owed $722 million 
in debts incurred during the immediate postwar period from the civilian goods purchased during 
the lend-lease program. Total foreign debt stood somewhere between $7 and $10 billion. The 
hard currency debt service ratio, total debt payments divided by hard currency earnings, was up 
to twenty percent by 1970. What hard currency income the Soviet Union did have came from 63
the sale of fuels and raw materials at the expense of overall GNP growth. That already limited 
stream of income was then reduced further by purchases of foreign grain and other agricultural 
products. Facing hard currency shortages, mounting billions in foreign debt, and a steadily 64
worsening hard currency debt service ratio, the Soviet Union was not a safe investment near the 
end. 
Without access to Western finance, East Asian credit could have been a solution, but most 
Asian investors were pumping their money into Western economies. While Giovanni Arrighi saw 
this growing reliance on East Asian finance and cheap labor as a negative, describing the United 
States as “the greatest debtor nation in world history,” he also acknowledged that it was this 
access to credit that allowed the American economy to flourish during the 1980s, putting even 
more pressure on the already lagging Soviet economy. Without access to significant foreign 65
credit from either East or West, the Soviet Union was vulnerable to outside pressure, something 
the United States was more than willing to provide. 
 Herbert S. Levine, “An American View of Economic Relations with the USSR,” The Annals of the American 63 Academy of Political and Social Science 414 (July 1974): 1–17. Gregory Grossman and Ronald L Solberg, “The Soviet Union’s Hard-Currency Balance of Payments and 64 Creditworthiness in 1985,” Rand Publication Series (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, April 1983). Giovanni Arrighi, “The World Economy and the Cold War,” in The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume 3: 65 Endings, ed. Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 23–44.
Olson 25
Competition with the US 
As mentioned earlier when discussing the cost of subsidizing the periphery, the Soviet 
Union saw itself as the vanguard of the global worker’s revolution, giving it an ideological duty 
to maintain parity with the forces of capitalism. Bolshevism posited that the capitalist system 
was inherently doomed to collapse under its own weight, not unlike what Nove and Roberts 
believed about the Soviet system. However, until such time as the capitalist system did finally 
collapse, it would strike out at whatever states had already managed the transition to socialism. 
Moreover, if the final end to capitalism did require a war, the Soviet Union would provide the 
core of the socialist forces. For this, it was not enough for the Soviet Union to simply maintain a 
military capable of defending its borders, it needed to be able to match the US and NATO in any 
potential conflict. 66
As if to confirm these fears, Western ideology and antagonism, especially under the 
Reagan administration, left the Soviet Union with little room to compromise military parity. 
Ronald Reagan’s foreign policy was ideologically focused on the East-West conflict to the near 
total exclusion of other issues or comprehensive strategy. Reagan set out on an ideological 
crusade at home and abroad, with an end goal of eliminating the “evil empire” from existence. 67
Outright military conflict was not something either side wanted. The nuclear arsenals of the two 
states had the power to erase human civilization from the planet, something everyone rightfully 
feared. Despite seeking peace, Reagan’s approach to dealing with the Soviet Union had left little 
room for cooperation. Outside of limited nuclear arms reductions, Reagan was unwilling to 
 R. T Maddock, The Political Economy of Soviet Defence Spending (Basingstoke: Macmillan Press, 1988), 26.66 Seweryn Bialer and Joan Afferica, “Reagan and Russia,” Foreign Affairs 61, no. 2 (Winter 1982): 249–71.67
Olson 26
compromise. This left the Soviets only two options, conflict or surrender because by the 1980s 68
the Soviet Union found the cost of maintaining the parity of the Cold War dynamic too 
burdensome to continue. Gorbachev and many others within the Soviet Union realized that 
keeping the military at full strength meant nothing if it came at the cost of growing the civilian 
sector. 69
The United States had both technological and economic advantages, making building and 
maintaining a large military far easier than it was for the USSR. For the United States, high-tech 
weaponry and computer systems were relatively cheap while manpower was relatively 
expensive. In the Soviet Union, the reverse was true. As a result, the United States fielded a 
military rich in advanced weapons systems but light on men while the Soviet Army was far more 
populous but less technically advanced. Further weakening the Soviet position, the US 70
economy was larger, making it better able to absorb the expense of a large military. The Soviet 
economy between 1960 and 1984 was never more than two-thirds the size of America’s. 
Matching US spending in real terms meant spending far more as a percentage of the overall 
economy. In 1985, Soviet military spending accounted for between fifteen and seventeen 71
percent of the entire Soviet economy. Meanwhile, between 1960 and 1989 the US military 72
budget never ran much above nine percent of its GDP and averaged a mere six-and-a half 
percent. 73
As the divide between East and West became more pronounced, the Soviet Union 
 Robert Service, The End of the Cold War 1985-1991 (New York: Public Affairs, 2015), 1-23.68 Odom, Collapse of the Soviet Military, 88-117.69 Maddock, Political Economy of Soviet Defence Spending, 5-6.70 Leo Cooper, The Political Economy of Soviet Military Power (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1989), 101.71 Maddock, Political Economy of Soviet Defence Spending, 184.72 “Military Expenditure (% of GDP) - United States,” The World Bank, 2019, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/73 MS.MIL.XPND.GD.ZS?end=1989&locations=US&start=1960.
Olson 27
prioritized military spending over domestic growth. As early as 1972, Leonid Brezhnev warned 
that unless the Soviet economy could improve its efficiency, a choice would have to be made 
between “significant growth in the workers' well-being, resources for the economy's rapid 
development in the future, and the requirements for maintaining at the necessary level the 
country's defense capability.” Unfortunately for the Soviet Union, that increased efficiency did 74
not manifest itself and by 1975 the situation had finally come to a head and something had to be 
cut. 
At first glance, 1975 might appear to be a time when the Soviet Union could have safely 
sacrificed some military spending to focus on the civilian economy. The United States had just 
suffered a heavy blow in losing the Vietnam War, international deals like SALT I and the 
Vladivostok agreement had seemingly recognized Soviet strategic parity with the United States, 
and the deal recently signed in Helsinki had ratified the Soviet gains during the Second World 
War. However, rather than relax defense spending while the United States was down, the Soviet 
Union stepped it up, trading long term economic growth for short term strategic gains. Over the 
following years, Soviet forces invaded Afghanistan, supported Cuban intervention in Angola, and 
backed Cuban efforts to foster revolution throughout Latin America. In the short term this may 
have seemed successful, but in the long term it only gave the United States a bigger economic 
lead. 75
This comparative Soviet disadvantage made the arms race into a tool of economic 
warfare. Although the mutually assured destruction promised by nuclear weapons kept both sides 
from considering direct confrontation, Clausewitz’ dictum that the ultimate object of war was “to 
 Leonid Brezhnev, “Speech on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the USSR” (December 21, 1972).74 Myron Rush, “Guns over Growth in Soviet Policy,” International Security 7, no. 3 (Winter 1982-1983): 167–179.75
Olson 28
submit the enemy to our will” still held true. Reagan’s rearmament policy was far more than just 
an attempt to bolster national defense. It was an offensive move intended to provoke reciprocal 
spending by Moscow that the Soviet Union could not afford. At the forefront of this attack was 
the Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars. The SDI was such a massive and technologically 
advanced undertaking that the Reagan administration hoped the USSR would be either unable to 
compete or else bankrupt its economy trying to. The Soviets return to disarmament talks after 
having walked out signified Reagan’s strategy had worked. 76
Joint arms reduction treaties became more than just a symbol of peace, but an economic 
necessity for the Soviet Union. While Gorbachev did not initially set out to reduce military 
spending as part of an economic plan, by 1989 those reductions were sorely needed and Western 
policies, like the US rearmament under Reagan, denied Gorbachev the ability to do so, 
debilitating an already weakened Soviet economy. Combined with the West’s refusal to provide 
an influx of capital into the USSR without guarantees of both structural and political reform, this 
further restricted Gorbachev’s ability to deal with the economic crisis. As he was unable to 
guarantee the reforms and thus unable to access Western credit and stave off economic collapse, 
mutual arms reduction treaties gave Gorbachev a way to ease budget pressures while giving 
Reagan a political win at home. 77
Unfortunately for the Soviet Union, those treaties were too little, too late. The Soviet 
economy was too weak relative to the United States and Gorbachev’s reforms were already 
underway. More than the economic issues themselves, the reforms intended to fix those issues 
 Cooper, Political Economy of Soviet Military Power, 58-75.76 Celeste A. Wallander, “Western Policy and the Demise of the Soviet Union,” Journal of Cold War Studies 5, no. 4 77 (Fall 2003): 137–77.
Olson 29
were what led directly to the collapse. 
From Economic Downturn to Political Collapse 
Gorbachev’s reforms were intended to address the lack of competitiveness in the Soviet 
economy. In its original presentation, these reforms were limited in scope, little more than a 
continuation of Yuri Andropov’s already limited reform programs. However, they did not remain 
confined to the mere tinkering of Andropov. Gorbachev’s policies changed in response to events, 
expanding to overcome challenges as they arose. By 1990, his reforms had evolved into a 
program of fundamentally restructuring the Soviet economy and liberalizing Soviet society from 
the top down. 78
As mentioned, Gorbachev’s program of reforms did not start out with a radical return to 
capitalism as their goal. They were intended to be moderate, gradual changes that would result in 
significant improvement in the Soviet system without a fundamental altering of it into something 
else. Gorbachev started with a promise of openness (glasnost) and a goal of restructuring 79
(perestroika) the central ministries and the economy itself, both announced almost immediately 
upon taking office. Although Gorbachev was not slow-walking his reforms, the changes were 80
also not meant to be overnight. 
Resistance to Gorbachev’s reforms came almost immediately from conservatives and 
hardliners as well as from the populace and system themselves who were ill prepared to operate 
in the new world Gorbachev was proposing. The 1985 Soviet Interview Project surveyed 2,793 
Soviet emigres to the United States, the overwhelming majority of which were educated, urban, 
 Robert V. Daniels, “Gorbachev’s Reforms and the Reversal of History,” The History Teacher 23, no. 3 (May 78 1990): 237–54. Timothy J. Colton, The Dilemma of Reform in the Soviet Union, Revised and Expanded Edition (New York: 79 Council on Foreign Relations, 1986), 131-134. Hough, “Gorbachev’s Strategy.”80
Olson 30
and Jewish, all points which should make the group predisposed to approve of the reforms. 
Despite this demographic predisposition, 45.3% of those surveyed supported censorship in the 
name of public safety and 72.2% opposed the basic tenets of a democratic system like opposition 
parties, political compromise, and dispersion of power. As for the economic reforms, a full 
46.8% supported state ownership of industry, though only 13.2% said the same for agriculture. If 
even those most predisposed to back Gorbachev’s reforms were only lukewarm at best in their 
support, that speaks to a lack of civic preparedness for the kinds of changes he was 
implementing. 81
Despite the lack of civic preparedness, Gorbachev’s reforms brought about the first free 
election in Soviet history. For the first time, Soviet citizens could freely support any candidate, 
regardless of their party affiliation. In many ways, this move was not intended to advance the 
interests of the people and it did not necessarily make Gorbachev some champion of democracy. 
Rather, this was a calculated choice to use liberalization to remove opponents to economic 
reform from power. Whether Gorbachev knew this wave of liberalization would eventually carry 
him off as well, or whether he just felt that was a risk worth taking, the elections did exactly that. 
In the short term, they removed his opposition, weakening the conservatives to the point of 
political impotence, but in the long term, it weakened his position as well. 82
Elections were dangerous because the challenges to reform were not limited to the voices 
opposing it. Gorbachev’s gradual pace and limited scope ran the risk of creating an appetite in 
the populace for radical change that his more moderate reforms could not satisfy. As a specific 83
 Robert D. Grey, Lauri A. Jennisch, and Alanna S. Tyler, “Soviet Public Opinion and the Gorbachev Reforms,” 81 Slavic Review 49, no. 2 (1990): 261–71. Christopher Young, “The Strategy of Political Liberalization: A Comparative View of Gorbachev’s Reforms,” 82 World Politics 45, no. 1 (October 1992): 47–65. Colton, Dilemma of Reform, 171-174.83
Olson 31
example of this, glasnost reforms opened the Soviet government up to criticism by a newly free 
media, and the 1986 Chernobyl disaster provided a publicly palatable opportunity to test the 
limits of that new freedom. Soviet newspapers for the first time called out Soviet officials for 
suppressing information and called for increased openness, showing how quickly public appetite 
for change can outpace reforms. 84
A command economy operates on the basis of coercion and reward. When there is not a 
profit motive for people to labor, the central authority has to provide some other incentive. 
Whether the government uses rewards or punishments to induce its citizens to labor, the system 
only works as long as people believe the government is capable of following through. A weak 
central authority will not be able to effectively punish those that break the rules or reward those 
that do not. As Mark Harrison put it, “high output relied on the credibility of the rewards and 
punishments promised by the dictator.” Gorbachev’s reforms, which had been intended to 
address perceived weaknesses, served instead to highlight the weaknesses in the system, inviting 
challenges to that system, which in turn exacerbated those weaknesses, leading to new reforms. 
This downward cycle played out very quickly, turning the Soviet Union from a growing 
economy as late as 1985 to a collapsing economy by 1990. Even if nothing had truly changed 85
within the Soviet economy, people’s perceptions of the strength of the system had. Without the 
confidence of the people within it, no system can stand for long. 
Not every challenge to the central authority was meant to challenge a weakened system, 
though. The August 1991 coup attempt was intended to save it by restoring order and removing 
 Colton, Dilemma of Reform, 160-165.84 Mark Harrison, “Coercion, Compliance, and the Collapse of the Soviet Command Economy,” Economic History 85 Review 55, no. 3 (2002): 397–433.
Olson 32
weak leadership from power. It was the last gasp of a dying order trying to save itself from the 
waste bin of history. As mentioned earlier when discussing the effects of the Afghan War, the 
Soviet government had by this time lost much of its legitimacy. This not only weakened its 
control over the general public, but also over the military. Military leadership, being naturally 
predisposed to a conservative, authoritarian, nationalist ideology, was largely not made up of 
supporters for Gorbachev’s reforms. Although the imminent collapse of the Soviet Union may 
have spurred the coup into action, its participants were already politically opposed to 
Gorbachev. 86
Although the Soviet Army could have easily seized control of the Soviet Union had it 
wanted to, the vast majority of the Soviet military made it clear within hours of the coup’s start 
that it would not be getting involved in the power struggle. This may seem puzzling to Western 
scholars viewing the Soviet Army as a monolithic construct within the command polity of the 
Soviet Union. However, subscribers to the Marxist-Leninist tradition, which views the military 
as a microcosm of the nation itself, displaying the same contradictions and conflicts, might find 
the answer much more easily. The military in 1991 was as politically and socially divided as the 
Soviet Union itself. It lacked the cohesion behind traditional values that the plotters had relied 
on. In the end, the majority of the military chose to give its allegiance to the Russian regime 87
legitimized by democracy rather than maintaining loyalty to the Soviet regime legitimized by 
history. Without the alternative authority presented by Boris Yeltsin, the coup might have 
succeeded. Ironically, the political fragmentation and liberalization of Soviet society that 88
 John W. R. Lepingwell, “Soviet Civil-Military Relations and the August Coup,” World Politics 44, no. 4 (July 86 1992): 539–72. Stephen M. Meyer, “How the Threat (and the Coup) Collapsed: The Politicization of the Soviet Military,” 87 International Security 16, no. 3 (Winter 1991-1992): 5–38. Lepingwell, “Soviet Civil-Military Relations.”88
Olson 33
Gorbachev’s reforms had wrought, the forces which would drive Gorbachev from power in 
December, were the very thing which kept him in power in August. 
The German reunification in 1990 was an even earlier indication of the collapsing Soviet 
system. In a conversation between East German leader Alexander Schalck and West German 
Minister of the Chancellery Rudolf Seiters in 1989, Schalck made it clear that the East German 
economy would collapse without immediate and significant aid from the West. West Germany 
promised generous loans, grants, and debt relief, in addition to economic and tourist programs to 
boost the eastern economy. While the collapse of the Berlin Wall may have been the made-for89
TV moment that signified the beginning of the end for the Soviet Union, the West German 
bailout of East Germany was the real signifier of an end to Soviet dominance and the beginning 
of German reunification. 
Through all this, the West was not simply a silent observer. The United States especially 
was actively involved and invested in the liberalization of the Soviet government and economy. 
In a meeting off the coast of Malta in late 1989, President George H. W. Bush expressed his 
ardent support for Gorbachev’s reforms. Speaking of perestroika, Bush said, “[Gorbachev], you 
are dealing with an administration and, for the most part, a Congress that want to see you 
succeed.” Though practically, the continued refusal by the West to invest further in the Soviet 90
Union without evidence of structural reform (i.e. liberalization), put pressure on Gorbachev to 
keep pushing his reforms forward in order to secure funding to grow the economy even at the 
 Hans-Hermann Hertle, ed., “Conversation on GDR-FRG Economic Cooperation between Alexander Schalck and 89 Egon Krenz, November 6, 1989,” in Der Fall Der Mauer. Die Unbeabsichtigte Selbstauflösung Des SED-Staates, trans. Howard Sargeant, Second Edition (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1999), 483–86. George H. W. Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev, “US Memorandums of Conversation” (Malta Summit, Maxim Gorky, 90 Malta: Wilson Center, 1989).
Olson 34
expense of political unity. While Bush may have wanted to see Gorbachev’s reforms succeed, 91
this was clearly more out of an interest in seeing the Soviet Union liberalized than in seeing it 
economically successful. 
This was reflective of American goals throughout the Cold War. Ever since George 
Kennan first sent his Long Telegram to Washington in 1946, the United States had seen the 
Soviet Union as ideologically incompatible with itself. Kennan had asserted, and the 
policymakers in Washington had accepted, that communist ideology cast all capitalist powers as 
innately hostile. As a result, the United States saw negotiations with the Soviet Union to attempt 
to end the conflict as meaningless. As Henry Kissinger said, “so long as the Soviet Union 
maintained its ideology, negotiations were treated as pointless. After a Soviet change of 
government, a settlement would become nearly automatic.” Although containment may have 92
been the stated goal, the United States had always seen the end of the Soviet regime as necessary 
for an end to the Cold War. Peace was seemingly only possible as long as every nation accepted 
the United States’ ideology, a policy which can arguably still be seen in the post-Cold War world 
in the American invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan where the terms of peace included the 
establishment of Western style democracies. 93
Following a decade of failed reforms, growing political divides, and lastly a failed 
military coup, the Soviet Union finally collapsed on December 25, 1991. It was a peaceful 
collapse, all things considered. The Soviet nuclear arsenal remained secure, with the nuclear 
suitcase passed from Gorbachev to Yeltsin, from the Soviet Union to Russia, the historic 
 Wallander, “Western Policy and the Demise of the Soviet Union.”91 Henry Kissinger, “Reflections on Containment,” Foreign Affairs 73, no. 3 (1994): 113–30.92 Odd Arne Westad, “The Cold War and America’s Delusion of Victory,” The New York Times, August 28, 2017.93
Olson 35
handover took place in a quiet hallway, witnessed only by its participants and a CNN camera 
crew with their cameras unfortunately turned off. Some days later, Yeltsin travelled to New 94
York to personally handle Russia’s takeover of the Soviet Union’s seat on the United Nations 
Security Council. The Cold War was over. 95
Conclusion 
So why did the Soviet Union collapse? The simple answer is that the central authority 
could no longer assert enough control to hold it together. The longer, more complete answer is 
that a myriad of factors led to a state of economic weakness within the USSR that left it unable 
to compete with the United States. Gorbachev’s reforms, intended to fix that weakness, instead 
created new weaknesses in the political realm which resulted in the eventual dissolution of the 
state at the end of 1991. 
The beginning of this work examined the “inherent flaws” theory of collapse which 
posited that the Soviet Union was somehow doomed to collapse due to the inherent weaknesses 
of either socialism, central planning, or the Soviet system specifically. The remainder of this 
paper has attempted to refute this theory. Instead, I argue that the collapse was the result of a 
political breakdown caused by Gorbachev’s program of reforms, which were themselves 
prompted not by an inherently broken system, but by the system being under immense external 
pressure, economic as well as political, from both its allies and enemies. 
As mentioned in the introduction, this paper discussed four external causes for the 
economic distress of the Soviet Union; the Soviet periphery, trade barriers, lack of access to 
foreign finance, and competition with the United States. Each of these alone was a significant 
 O’Clery, Last Day of the Soviet Union, 269-270.94 O’Clery, Last Day of the Soviet Union, 305.95
Olson 36
source of economic turmoil, but taken together they presented an obstacle requiring drastic 
economic and social restructuring to overcome. 
By the 1980s, the Soviet periphery represented a drain on resources more than anything 
else. The Soviet Union sent billions of dollars in military aid to Africa just over the five year 
period from 1974 to 1978, between $3.5 and $4.5 billion in subsidies to Cuba annually. Even 
when not directly subsidizing its periphery, the Soviet Union frequently entered into uneven 
trade arrangements which served to transfer wealth away from the core by overvaluing cheap 
products like food and undervaluing expensive goods like oil. Meanwhile, the war in 
Afghanistan cost some $50 billion, fifteen thousand Soviet lives, and caused irreparable damage 
to the reputation of the Soviet Army and government. When the economy took a drastic 
downturn in 1990 as a result of decreased confidence in the system and growing division 
between the Soviet republics, the system finally collapsed. 
Trade barriers left the Soviet Union to rely on domestic sources that were less efficient or 
more costly than purchasing the same goods abroad, limiting the ability of the state to 
compensate for internal shortcomings in one field by leveraging advantage in another. As 
discussed, most of these barriers were either self-imposed or else non-formal in nature. By 
insisting on direct control over trade by the central government instead of allowing local or even 
private groups to handle it, the Soviet Union was able to enact broad protectionist policies for 
domestic industries, but as a result, trade with the Soviet Union became inefficient and 
undesirable. Soviet protectionism insulated industry from competition, which allowed it to grow 
safely, but that also served to remove any incentive for factories to work to become competitive 
in the future. Soviet industry did not need to compete with the West, so it never put in the effort 
Olson 37
to do so. 
A lack of access to foreign finance similarly left the Soviet economy reliant on internal 
methods to overcome shortcomings. Foreign investment could have allowed the Soviet Union to 
build new, modern factories, purchase technology unavailable domestically, and bolster flagging 
elements of the economy. However, a history of over-borrowing in past decades, a lack of hard 
currency, and secretive, unreliable bookkeeping made the Soviet Union a very poor investment 
choice in the 1980s. Without access to those foreign lines of credit, the USSR was left with little 
ability to fix the economic problems it faced. 
Exacerbating all of these issues was the constant competition with the United States. 
While this paper ignored the Space Race, which had already ended in a US victory long before 
the 1980s, the Arms Race was still going strong until near the end. It accelerated when Reagan 
took office with a policy of rearmament and a hostile attitude. The United States had the 
technological and economic ability to build and advance both military and civilian endeavors at 
the same time. Meanwhile, the “evil empire” was forced to divert its budget away from civilian 
investment to military R&D to match the United States. Although, even earlier, in the 1970s, 
when the Soviet Union could have focused on civilian investment, it showed a preference for 
military spending, so it seems possible that it was the mere existence of the United States as a 
rival that created the pressure rather than any specific policies or budgets the United States might 
have had. 
When Mikhail Gorbachev took office in 1985, the economy was at the top of his agenda. 
What started out as a plan for moderate reform rapidly transformed into a program of radical and 
fundamental changes to the Soviet system as Gorbachev encountered issues that could not be 
Olson 38
solved with only moderate changes. Although perestroika, the restructuring of the Soviet system, 
may have gotten the majority of the attention, it was the new policy of glasnost, literally 
“openness,” that may have caused the most damage. Freedom of speech, press, and ideas allowed 
dissent and challenges to authority to spread. The failed war in Afghanistan and the Chernobyl 
disaster became subjects of widespread criticism, weakening the power of the central authority. 
The people’s perceptions of the powerful and unquestionable Soviet government had been 
shattered now that it was open to public criticism.  
The failed August 1991 coup served to underscore both the central government’s 
weakness and the lack of resolve in the Soviet Army. The Soviet government was too weak to 
prevent the coup, the Army too divided to support it. Neither institution displayed the strength 
necessary to hold together an already fracturing union. Four months later, the Soviet Union 
dissolved, ending the Cold War and entering the pages of history. 
So why, despite decades of economic growth and political and military ascendency, did 
the Soviet Union suddenly collapse under Gorbachev? In short, the high cost to Russia of 
subsidizing its satellite states, especially in Eastern Europe, and of maintaining military parity 
with NATO, as well as trade barriers, and the resultant technological lag, meant that the USSR 
was no longer able to compete economically or militarily with the West. In an attempt to rectify 
this lack of competitive ability and improve standards of living Gorbachev instituted a program 
of reforms that weakened the central government and invited challenges to its authority. These 
growing political divides then led to the dissolution of the Soviet Union. 